+++
title = "DNS and The Bit 0x20"
date = 2018-01-19T14:50:30Z
slug = "dns-0x20"
desc = "Short note on a clever hack that makes everyones DNS just a bit more secure."
type = "short"
tags = ["security", "dns"]
+++

While writing a post on Certificate Authority Authorization (<abbr>CAA</abbr>) <abbr>DNS</abbr> record, I’ve learned about this other <abbr>DNS</abbr> thing&#8239;---&thinsp;a neat hack that makes cache poisoning attacks harder.

First, let’s look at the problem.

## Cache Poisoning

Recursive DNS resolvers, like Google’s `8.8.8.8` or one in your home router, will remember for some time answers to the queries they’ve served. In doing so, they make processing much faster, at least for popular domains: when your computer asks for the <abbr>IP</abbr> of _google.com_ most of the time your <abbr>ISP</abbr>’s <abbr>DNS</abbr> won’t have to go search for an answer since someone else probably already asked it before. When combined with the communication mechanisms of <abbr>DNS</abbr> this creates a problem.

<abbr>DNS</abbr> communications go over <abbr title="User Datagram Protocol">UDP</abbr> protocol, which means that the client doesn't establish a “session” to the server. It just sends its query into the void of the Internet in the latter’s general direction and then hopes for an answer. (_I think I’ve heard of DNS-over-TCP but I know nothing about it except that it exists. Probably._)

When the answer finally arrives, there is a bit of a guessing game involved to figure out if it’s trustworthy:

* of course, client knows for which domains it expects answers and it’ll drop the unexpected ones, but the large public <abbr>DNS</abbr> resolvers query most popular domains as soon as cache for them expires
* client can’t trust the source <abbr>IP</abbr> of the answer since it can be replaced with the legitimate one (spoofed)
* both request and response contain a transaction <abbr>ID</abbr>, but it is only 16 random bits long, which is pretty small and, statistically, easily guessable

And so, we could continuously bombard the client with the bogus query answers
```
11:00:00.000 hey, the IPv4 of google.com is 127.0.0.1 [transactionId:0x42]
11:00:00.100 hey, the IPv4 of google.com is 127.0.0.1 [transactionId:0x156]
11:00:00.200 hey, the IPv4 of google.com is 127.0.0.1 [transactionId:0x1]
11:00:00.300 hey, the IPv4 of google.com is 127.0.0.1 [transactionId:0x5211]
…
```
in hopes that _our_ answer arrives at the exact moment when a query for _google.com_ was sent, but the _legitimate_ one did not come yet. This way, we make resolver remember our malicious answer and serve it to its clients. We’re _poisoning its cache._

One of the ways to make <abbr>DNS</abbr> poisoning harder is to add more identifying information to the legitimate answer that is hard for an adversary to predict. That’s what the [Use of Bit 0x20 in DNS Labels to Improve Transaction Identity][0x20-draft] <abbr title="Request for Comments">RFC</abbr> draft is about.

## Bit 0x20 Improvement

The core idea is simple and based on two facts:

* while it’s not required by the specification, most of the <abbr>DNS</abbr> servers copy the domain from query to answer as-is
* domain names are case-insensitive, so queries for _google.com_, _googlE.COM_, and _gOOgle.cOm_ should return the same result

Authors’ insight was to combine these and propose that clients would send themselves information via the server in the casing of the domain's letters. For example, instead of
```
what's the IPv6 of google.com? [transactionId:0x3424]
```
the client would use a randomly capitalised version of _google.com_
```
what's the IPv6 of GOglE.com? [transactionId:0x4385]
```
so it can verify that the case matches in its query and the answer it received.

The difference between lower and upper case in <abbr>ASCII</abbr> is in the 6<sup>th</sup> bit&#8239;---&thinsp;it is cleared (`0`) for the uppercase and set (`1`) for lowercase letters. `0x20` is a number with all bits set to `0` except 6<sup>th</sup>. That’s why this technique got known as “DNS 0x20.” Apparently, it is also called “mixed-case queries.”

## In The Present

The draft that proposed this, as far as I understand, never became an adopted RFC. So, strictly speaking, servers are not required to preserve the casing from the query in their answers. But anyway, it looks like most do: Google says that [more than 70% of their Public <abbr>DNS</abbr>’s traffic goes to servers that support mixed-casing.][google-dns-doc]

It’s kind of ironic that `0x20` introduces complexity to the implementation of other <abbr>DNS</abbr> feature created to enhance its security&#8239;---&thinsp;<abbr title="DNS Security Extensions">DNSSEC</abbr>. Authoritative servers are supposed to sign their answers, but for some reason, they are required to construct and sign answer with the domain in lowercase and then return mixed-case answer plus that signature. Bugs related to this even got mentioned in the [recent draft on <abbr>CAA</abbr>.][next-caa-draft]

So here you go. Now, when you see a weird _hypoTHetIcAl.me_ <abbr>DNS</abbr> query in your Wireshark logs, you’ll know what’s up. 😎

## Links

* Original [0x20 proposal draft][0x20-draft] from 2008
* [Docs on security of Google's Public <abbr>DNS</abbr>][google-dns-doc]
* A very in-depth [guide to the <abbr>DNS</abbr> cache poisoning][kaminsky-guide]
* Proposed draft on <abbr>CAA</abbr> has a section [7.3. Bogus <abbr>DNSSEC</abbr> Responses][next-caa-draft] that mentions <abbr>DNS</abbr> `0x20` and got me interested in all this

[0x20-draft]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-vixie-dnsext-dns0x20-00
[google-dns-doc]: https://developers.google.com/speed/public-dns/docs/security
[kaminsky-guide]: http://unixwiz.net/techtips/iguide-kaminsky-dns-vuln.html
[next-caa-draft]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-hoffman-andrews-caa-simplification-02#section-7.3
